Awesome. Well, let's get started here and we can let people come in from the
waiting room as they join as well. But hi everybody. Thank you so much for
joining us today. Welcome to the RStudio Enterprise Community Meetup, our energy
meetup today. I'm Rachel calling in from Boston. I'm actually at the RStudio
office today in the seaport. If you just joined now, feel free to introduce
yourselves through the chat window and say hello, maybe where you're calling in
from. I like to just let people know at the beginning if you want to turn on
live transcription for the meetup, you can do so in the zoom bar below if you
just press more. But to go through a brief agenda, we'll have some short
introductions of the meetup and welcome everyone here. Our introduction to
functional data analysis with Santiago Rodriguez and then lots of time for
questions and open discussion at the end as well. So just a reminder, this meetup
will be recorded too, so it will be shared to the RStudio YouTube. I'll put
it on the meetup discussion and on LinkedIn. So to ask questions, if you
don't want to be part of the recording, you can always use the Slido link that
I'll share in just a moment in the chat. Yeah, you can put your name in there too
if you want and I can call on you to ask the question live or you could ask
anonymously. And for anybody joining for the first time, welcome. This is a
friendly and open meetup environment for teams to share the work
they're doing within their organizations, teach lessons learned, network with each
other, really just allow us all to learn from each other. So thank you all so much
for making this a welcoming community too. We really want this to be a space
where everybody can participate, we can hear from everyone, regardless of your
level of experience or the industry that you work in. So if you ever have
suggestions or general feedback, please let me know too. I'll share a few other
links in the chat as well where you can do so. But with that, thank you all again
for joining us. I would love to turn it over to our speaker, Santiago Rodriguez.
Santiago and I are friends from LinkedIn. That's actually how we first met.
Santiago is a data scientist in the marketing department at Consumers Energy,
a Michigan-based public utility.
Hi, Rachel. Hi, everybody. And that's exactly right. I reached out to Rachel
one day because she had a really interesting post on some functions in R
that I hadn't heard of before. I thought they were great. So I just sent a, hey,
cool post and just ended up here. Maybe that's inspirational for somebody. If
you have something you want to share, reach out. There's a community. Okay, so
let's get started. Our agenda today is going to cover some introductions. I'm
going to introduce myself, the topic, a little bit about Consumers Energy because
I'm using some of their data. So I want to give a shout out, a definition as to
what functional data analysis is. And then the meat of the presentation is
really examples and applications of a functional data analysis, this method of
analysis. And then we'll wrap up with some resources in case anybody's
interested in how I got started. All right, allow me to introduce myself a
little bit further. I was born in Ecuador, South America. I saw somebody in
the chat was from Columbia. Hello, neighbor. I grew up in South Florida. And
I've lived in Dallas, Texas for seven years or so. I have a bachelor's from
Florida State University and a master's in statistics from Texas A&M. I currently
work as a data scientist in marketing. And I've had the pleasure of working
across different industries, primarily because I'm a learner and I love
learning new things in different industries, different functions. And then
when I'm not at work, I'm primarily reading, usually stats books. And if it's
not stats books, it's fiction, nonfiction. I like to travel. This year, my
wife and I have dedicated time to traveling. And I love to fish. I grew up
in South Florida. There's a body of water around every corner. Allow me to
introduce Consumers Energy. They're the sponsor of the data for this
presentation. It's a public utility founded in Michigan. They serve the
majority of Michigan's residents and have a generation capacity of about six
gigawatts. And then about today. My talk will be primarily descriptive,
non-technical. We won't get into math or code, really. It's all about what is
functional data analysis and how can you use it, what are applications. And my
goal today is to introduce this relatively young branch of statistics
and then show you that it has value, that it can add value, that it's worth
your time to explore and maybe learn as well. And I got started with this. I
wanted to share that really quickly. I'm by no means an expert on functional
data analysis. I've been playing around with this stuff for a few months,
probably close to a year. And in the utility space, meter reads are our
primary data source for a lot of things. And the time series nature of
meter reads allow you to do a couple of different interesting things. If
you're a time series person, you have decompositions and other more
traditional stuff. I found that functional data analysis with meter
reads was such a perfect combination. And I'll show you some of these
examples in a bit. As far as logistics, I've added little break points into
the presentation, partly to give me a break, get a glass of water if I need.
And if you have any questions, you can ask a question in that section. That
way, you don't forget or I don't forget what the heck I was talking about.
Maybe it's a little bit more relevant in that point in time. All right,
first up, this is an academic section, sort of, it's a definition, what can
we do with functional data analysis? It's the only math formula formula
you'll see today. And it's useful upfront before we get into applications
to define what this is, what functional data analysis is. And FDA is, that's
the acronym FDA functional data analysis. It's an analysis of information
on curves and functions. For our purposes today, we're going to highlight
curves. But if you work in, let's say, with spatial data, you can use
functions as well. Functional data analysis is essentially a non
parametric flexible regression technique that is used to approximate
a curve. You know what? Okay, here we go. It's used to approximate a curve
or a function via a linear combination of basis functions, it looks like a
regression formula, you have coefficients and points, right data. In
this case, there's a there's a slight tweak, where what we're trying to do is
using these red dots, in this case, these are meter reads our data, using
the data, we're going to fit a curve, right, we're going to approximate a
curve using basis functions. And that's that fee function in the formula, it's
a non parametric function, and has the form of the bottom right graph, it
looks like lines. And that's, that's essentially it, I don't want to get too
into the weeds here. You have a formula, you have coefficient coefficients that
you estimate, you can do your usual stuff, like these squares. And then you
have these, the key here is these, this fee function that does something that
creates these curves, right, and then you fit your data with those.
Naturally, the question is, all right, we fit these curves, now what can we do
with these curves? And it turns out you can do quite a bit, actually, you can do
descriptive stats, max, min, median, variance, confidence intervals, you can
do interpolation things such as connecting the dots, right, if you have
meter reads, and you want to show a line, instead of using the default plotting
method, you could use functional data analysis and connect the dots with a
little bit, a little bit more smoothly. You can do extrapolation, functionally,
that looks like functional regression, if you want to do some inferential type
work, if you're doing some predictive work, you can use GAMS, if you've ever
used that, you're using functional data analysis on the back end, that uses
cubic splines. A relatively newer approach is clustering, you can cluster
the curves. And then if you're doing time series analysis, you can use some
of these techniques as part of that as well.
And here's the pitch, right? I think it's worthwhile to explore functional
data analysis, I know I found it useful. And it's another tool in your toolbox.
And if a question comes along from a stakeholder or something, you find
something, you have potentially a better fitting tool for the job. And if you've
ever worked with your hands, or you've ever built anything, you know that the
right tool makes the job so much easier. As far as fitting the curve, as
far as the method goes, it's quite flexible. It allows you to fit a curve
via that phi function, right, that nonparametric function, a number of
different ways. Fourier bases are really good for periodic data. And in this
case, meter reads tend to be periodic or semi periodic, there's some kind of
cyclicality to things. So it's a it's good for that. E splines, a common word,
cubic splines, wavelets, etc. And then it's not only about fitting the curve,
it's about fitting the right curve, right, you want to make sure you've
you've fit, you've accounted for residuals, you're fitting the right
curve, you're not overfitting, you're not underfitting. And there's a couple
ways to fit the optimal curve, you have least squares methodology, as well as a
penalization technique. And then arguably, the coolest thing about
functional data analysis, and the curves that you fit, is that those
curves are differential. Now, at first, I didn't realize how useful that could
be. And I kind of glossed over it. And I've recently gone back and learned
more and explored that area further, because it opens up a treasure chest of
information. I think some areas have experience working with derivatives. For
example, engineers might look at rates of change. physicists use derivatives
often, right. But if you work, like I've worked primarily in commercial
functions, marketing, finance operations, I haven't had a need that to look at
derivatives. But it really is interesting. And I have an example of
that in a bit. So we have our first stopping point. I don't know if there
are any questions. If not, I'm just gonna grab a glass of water.
I can check over on Slido. But just to remind everyone, if you want to ask
questions, either anonymously or with your name, you can do so on Slido. And
I'll put the link in the chat again. But the short link is rstd.io slash
meetup-questions. Put that there again.
There's a question in the chat here about overfitting. That's, that's
definitely possible. If you were going to do any sort of, if you were just
connecting the dots, and you probably wouldn't care too much about the fit.
But if you're doing anything inferential, or you want to take into
account for overfitting or underfitting, I would suggest doing a split the
data, your typical hypertuning, try different number of basis functions,
see which one has the least, the best sum of squares error. You could also
use the penalization technique. That's, I found that to be probably the best
approach. You could, you could fully, you can fit a fully parameterized
model. But with the penalty, you account for the overfitting or
underfitting. I found that to be more powerful. I don't want to get too into
the weeds, but hopefully that answers your question. In short, in summary,
there are ways to account and address underfitting and overfitting.
Thanks, Santiago. And feel free to unmute yourself if you want to add
context to questions to or, or raise your hand on zoom, and I can call on
you. It should let you unmute yourself. There was an anonymous question that
was what is the sample size you need to fit the curves?
Good question. Let's see, I am working on stuff on the side. So everything
I'll share after this section are snippets of applications that I'm
working on as proof of concepts at work. And I've worked with millions of
records, because you figured time series data can go, it gets so big so
fast. Or you can work just 24 points, right? If I, if I'm working with
summarized meter reads, let's say I have, that's actually a really funny
question. It's a perfect segue into the next section. Let's say I have a
year's worth of meter reads, I summarize them by day, right? So I do
the mean by hour, the 24 hours, and I'll end up with 24 points, right?
That's like the slide, the picture we saw earlier with those red dots are
24 red dots, one for each of the day, each of the hours. That's all that's
all you need to fit the curve. If you wanted to do a little bit more, maybe
some inferential work, like build confidence intervals, then just having
those 24 summarized points won't do you any good because you have no way to
construct the standard deviation, you don't have that sigma matrix. So you
can work with, you'll see this in a second, you can work with the
summarized information in just the 24 points in this example, or you can work
with all the data, and then you have access to more information, you can do a
little bit more. But depending on your machine, depending on your hardware,
that gets pretty out of control quickly. I'll show you in a second, I'll try to
remember to bring that up.
And I noticed, well, you mentioned that's a good segue into the next one.
So we can save some of the questions for the next pause, too.
Yeah, that's it. Yes, thank you. If, if you see something in the in this
section, as far as further conversation on that previous question, or any other
question from the chat, we'll address it. And Nahal makes a good point. If you
are doing a machine learning type of thing, you do want to separate your test
and train. That's feel like that's, that's a whole topic of its own. So I
won't go there. But yes, you should. Okay, so we talked about summarizing the
time series data. And in the utility space, I found that this is probably the
most common way to do that. It's called the daily load profile. It is a way to
summarize the consumption information to easily see trends, right. And there's a
couple different ways to do this load has different conditions and consumption
and demand. The approach here is functional data analysis technique, it
works for however you choose to summarize the data. I'm in marketing. So
I tend to use the mean or some kind of like centrality type measure mean
median to summarize, but you could do the max if you're more focused on the
create an electrical generation capacity, if what's the maximum load
that the system can handle, or you can do the average. However, that's the
fine meaning. And once you have these low profiles, you can connect the
dots like we talked about functional data analysis, that was one of the
questions, how many, how many points do you need? As little as whatever you
have 24. In this case, or as many as you have, you can build confidence
intervals. And I find that's useful instead of just providing a point
estimate, provide a little bit more clarity as to what's the variance look
like. And then the daily load profile is the most classic decomposition here.
But there are others, you can decompose it any other way. And if you, if you're
a little familiar with time series, you'll know, you'll know what kind of
what that means. I want to get into that too much here. But essentially,
what you're doing is decomposing the time series and summarizing it in some
way. This is our first example. This is time series information. This is an
actual customers meter reads. This is only two weeks, I'm working with about
two years worth of data on the back end, that would look very messy if I
plotted the whole thing. But this is essentially the underlying data
structure. It's a time series. You can see there's like a, it's not really
upward trending or anything, but there's some cyclicality to it, there's ups
and downs. So if you've studied time series, you can look this and you can
extract information from it. But it's useful to summarize and decompose this
information. And that's where this daily load profile, load profiles in general
come in. That's step one, we're going to decompose that time series. And what
you're looking at here is two years worth of meter reads. On the x axis, you
have your day, 24 hours of the day, and your measure of consumption on the y
axis, each dot represents a meter read for a particular day and hour, right? So
you have about 700 days plotted here. Okay, step one, step two, we're going to
apply functional data analysis. And I don't show how to do that or anything.
This is just a showcase what you can do with it. And this always makes me
trouble because it looks like static on a screen, kind of artsy, if you've ever
seen those, those memes or about deep learning art, and what that looks like
in the back and the kind of looks like this, it's funny. What we've done is we
fit a functional curve to every day, right? So for the last two years worth
of meter reads, we fit a curve to every one of those days. And you can you can
see a couple things from here. I don't get too into that. But it looks like at
the bottom portion of consumption. So from between zero and 400 is where the
majority of the consumption for this particular customer in the last few
years is. And there's some, there's some, like outliers, I guess, out beyond that
400 range. Step three is summarize, right? Because this is useful in to do a
couple different things that we talked about. You can summarize these curves, we
can summarize all these curves into a single curve, we can build confidence
intervals. I would never present this to a stakeholder, because they would look
at you like you're crazy. But this is much more readable, right? So we've
summarized all those curves to produce a point estimate curve, right? We fit the
curve to these 24 dots, meter reads, we extracted the standard deviations, the
variance component, because we had all those curves, we were able to build
confidence intervals around that. And that allows us to answer questions
depending on what that may be. But you can say something like, on average, we
are 95% confident that consumption at this point in time is between A and B,
right? A little bit more of a complete picture. And that's the daily load
profile, right? But there are other ways to decompose a time series, you can do
day a week, day a month, month a year, be creative, there might be seasonal
components, other than that one to 24 hour period. And those three steps are
the same across any of these decompositions. Decompose, you choose your
decomposition, you fit functional data analysis, and then you summarize. And
this is in part hosted by our studio. So I, as I was putting this together, I
thought, well, one thing you can do was decompose the time series in a couple of
different ways, collect those decompositions, put them together in some
shiny app dashboard. And you will very quickly have a rough idea as to what the
average behavior for a customer is. For example, the first time you see a
frown on the top left, I probably wouldn't use a line for this, but you
could maybe bar chart would be more appropriate. But you see that for this
customer, it's a business customer, and you see that consumption is highest
between Monday and Friday. And there's an interaction effect on the weekends,
right consumption drops at the weekends. On the bottom right, you see the month
and consumption tends to be higher on average in the winter months versus the
summer. It's kind of useful to see experimenting with different things
playing around. It's a very flexible technique. Okay, second pause. Are there
any questions?
Yes, there's a few other questions coming in on Slido. But just want to let
everyone know again, too, if you want to raise your hand on zoom, or jump in
live, feel free to do so as well. But the other questions were, so one was
often with meter readings, you can have a lot of noise, do you need to clean
the data in advance to remove outliers and other noise in your data?
Good question. We have a whole, I guess, two parts. The first part, the raw
meter reads are cleaned up from a production system by our engineers. So
I'm extracting this from an already cleaned state in a database somewhere. I
I don't do too much outside of that, whatever they've done, I don't do too
much. I just take it all in because I'm summarizing that information. If there
are outliers, they're kind of taken care of by averaging, right? If you're
afraid of, if you're afraid that there are too many outliers, instead of
summarizing by the mean, you can do the median. Or you can do a pre-processing
step to say, you want to use, there's so many different ways to define an
outlier. However you choose, you can pre-process and eliminate those data
points and then just work with what remains. But I didn't do any of that
here. I used the whole two years.
Thank you. Yeah, there's one other question that was, can the FDA approach
be used to estimate deviations from the norm, like theft of electricity?
I would imagine. It's a pretty robust technique. I haven't done any sort of
anomaly detection. But I would imagine you could. For example, if you had an
estimate of what normal consumption is, and then all of a sudden, there's a
spike, you would see that, right? Because if you built a confidence interval
around what you thought to be true consumption, true behavior, built your
confidence interval to be like, super wide 99%, right? Then if something did
come in that was way outside of that band, it might be positive to flag it
and investigate it further. But I haven't done too much of that. No, there
you go. Kelly, thank you. PCA. A lot of the, that's a good point. A lot of the
techniques you're used to, principal component analysis, clustering, now,
other things, they have functional counterparts. That might be worth
exploring. Awesome. Okay, keep going. Derivatives, I found this to be really
interesting. I, outside of calculus, didn't think I would use derivatives at
work. But it turns out to be really useful. And one of the things I'm
working on now is sort of a feature engineering technique to build the
features for machine learning, predictive type work. I'll show you a
little bit about what I mean by that. It's just opened up a new realm of
analysis for me that I've been fascinated by. And we're going to
revisit this, we fit this, this curve to this customer. And now we're going
to differentiate this curve. And we're going to look at the velocity and
acceleration for this particular customer. So this average, average
behavior curve. And there's a couple of interesting things here. If you
look at the max velocity and the minimum, right, these global, global
extrema, if you're almost able to describe some of the behavior of the
customer, right, so you can say something like, perhaps on peak hours
for this particular customer is between 8am and 5pm. Now knowing that this is
a business customer, you're like, yeah, that makes sense. And if you wanted to
do, for fun, if you were doing calculus, you can do the second derivative
test, right, where the first derivative is zero, look at the second
derivative, is it greater than zero or less than zero, that tells you
something about whether that that time is a max or minimum. Kind of cool.
Next, this is a classic, this was new to me, this is a classic way of
looking at derivative information in engineering and physics. And it's the
same information we just looked at, but it's slightly presented in a
different manner. It's really good for cyclical type data. In this case, it
works really nicely consumption and meter read type data. And what you see
is what we said earlier, all the way to the right on the positive on the x
axis, you have velocity, you see eight, this 8am is max velocity. If we look
all the way to the left, we see 5pm minimum velocity. And then you see
these, these cycles, almost these circles, right, you have this big
circle to the right and positive velocity section, you have a small
circle center around zero, maybe like a plateau in consumption. And then you
have two periods of ramping down in consumption, one bigger than the other.
And that's essentially what's happening here, right? Between the hours of four
and 10am, the consumption for this particular customer on average starts
to ramp up and peaks at 8am. And then between somewhere in the midday, it
plateaus, then you have two periods of ramping down, the primary ramping down
period is between about two to 8pm, six, seven, yes, by 8pm, then you have this
final ramping down for the day, it's almost like they're closing up shop for
the end of the day. That's pretty interesting. I personally have never
looked at it this way, I find it really interesting to describe behavior,
customer behavior in this way. And it's another descriptive feature, to add
information in context to any analysis you're doing. And we can translate
translate this back to the original, the original data, right? We have those
four periods, the first period of the day is ramping up, you have this plateau
in consumption, that primary ramp down. And then you have that closing up shop
period. And then the cycle repeats, ramp up, plateau, ramp down, ramp down. But I
found this really fascinating. I thought this is really cool. One of the things I
am working on, as a proof of concept at work, is to extract those global
extrema, using the first derivative as individual on peak periods. For example,
right now, at Consumers Energy, let's say we have a predefined window for what we
call on peak hours for residential customers. I don't remember how we came
up with those, but let's say they're like from A to B. Well, that's very broad,
and we ask customers to fit into that mold. But using something like
derivatives, you can, you can define what on peak hours are for each customer. So
you can be hyper personalized, be much more customer centric. So I'm building
something now, I'm building a data set for all our customers to define those
personal on peak hours to potentially use and explore in as features in other
type of works. Let's see. I'll stop there. Any questions, any thoughts?
I don't see other questions specific to the top. Oh, I see. Reggie, you just
asked a question on Slido. Would you want to jump in and ask it live?
I can't. Oh, I don't have a mic. I'll ask a question. But it is what are the
approaches to account for heat? Oh my gosh, I'm not gonna say this word.
heterogeneity, other than fitting separate models to investigate interactions with some
x variable like location. Good question. I don't, I haven't done too much of that. My
there's functional regression, which would help you with that. If I understood what you're saying,
correctly, if you had other components, and you wanted to do some sort of functional
analysis with you could use functional regression, it's very similar to what you're
used to just with a layer of an abstraction with functions or curves, as opposed to individual
features. Kelly again for the win. Thank you. I haven't used FPCA on my own. I know it does
doesn't on the back end. I haven't done that too much. What else?
Awesome. I see current current Tema. Apologies if I mispronounce your name. You have your hand
raised. You want to jump in? Hi, I really liked the idea. Can you hear me? Yes, I can. Yes. I
really liked the idea about using the derivative to find the peak period. So I was thinking of
if I have meter reads from let's say 100 customers, and then I wanted to find which customers have the
same peak periods. So I could see relatively how I could do it for one and then do it for all of
them. But how my general idea is I was thinking I could write a code, which would give me okay,
these customers are always these are the serial numbers of the meters of customers who have peak
periods between eight and five. These are customers which have peak periods between
six and 10. I don't know that that's what I was thinking. Is that something where you think this
can be applied? That's a good question. And it's very pressing. That's actually exactly what I'm
working on right now is once you've defined it's almost two steps, right? Once you've defined
these on-peak periods for all customers, you can aggregate that information to construct
group level on-peak periods, right? So let's say I have in your example 100 meter reads. I've
defined what the on-peak periods are using derivatives. Then you can do one of two things
really for your purpose. You would probably just cluster. You could just cluster that information
and see which customers have similar on-peak periods. What else can you do? That's probably
how I would approach that problem. And then I'm working on a internal white paper that does that
very thing actually. It clusters about like 60,000 customers worth of information and
defines on-peak periods for each cluster. Does that answer the question? Is that kind of what
you're thinking? Yes, yes. Because the type of data I work with is renewable energy. So we wanted
to know which people are using solar will be best fit for solar energy because their on-peak period
is in the daytime, which people will be best for other types of energy because their on-peak period
is in different. Yeah, so that's where I was heading. Yeah, that's actually the questions
have been great. That's a perfect segue into the next section. There's been some recent research
about clustering these curves. So you could, for example, fit a curve to all of your 100 customers
and then cluster the curves themselves as opposed to treating the time series measurements. Let's
say you had 24 hours. Instead of treating the 24 hours as individual features that are highly
correlated, you can cluster the curves. And funny enough, that is the next section.
It's almost like you timed it up perfectly. Yeah, and it's almost, as I've been learning
this technique and applying this, the fitting of the curves, kind of like connecting the dots,
derivatives, and then clustering, has been my progression through this learning process.
The first thing was just getting comfortable and fitting the curves, trying different ways to fit
the curves for your bases, cubic splines, wavelets, you name it. And then getting the derivative
information, how is that useful, building use cases, kind of showing the utility. And then
the question came up, just like yours, well, what else can we do with that? And it just occurred to
me, well, I'm in marketing. A lot of what we do is segmentation and clustering, and we want to be
more targeted in our messaging and all that. Well, can we cluster this information? Can we cluster
this stuff? And it turns out you can. And for this, I'm using the Hello World example of functional
data analysis. There is a package in Aura called FDA in it. There's this data, if you want to
get in and play with it. It's averaged Canadian weather temperature
for, I think, 36 or 50, some number of Canadian stations, some weather stations in Canada,
for a year. So they've averaged this. It looks almost like a low profile, but instead of being
hours, you're looking at days in the year. And they've averaged the temperatures. The red line
there is the average of the group. And before I proceed, take a look at this and ask yourselves,
if you had two crayons or coloring pencils or pencils, whatever, and I asked you to color in
the lines based on how you would group these things into two different groups, how would you
do that? Keep that in mind. How we've done it traditionally at work has been to treat the
features, in this case, hours of the year, days of the year. In my case, it's been hours in the
day, 24. In this example, it's 1 through 365. Treat those features as features in a clustering,
in a traditional clustering process. The features are highly correlated, right? They're
dependent on each other. So you use some kind of dimension reduction technique,
principal component analysis, for example. In this case, I extracted two PCs. That was like 95
or 97 percent of the variance. And this is what comes out. And it looks like it makes sense,
right? So there's not really any questions. It looks pretty straightforward. And this is
your traditional clustering. PCA, dimension reduction if you need it, and you do need it,
and then k-means. You can probably do hierarchical clustering as well,
extract two, so many different approaches. It's just k-means. And then this is relatively newer.
This is clustering the curves themselves via something, it's a library in our called
FunHDDC. I think the first paper describing this came out 2017, 2015 maybe. I'm not sure,
but it's recent. And it does something very similar, but from a functional perspective.
And it looks very different from the clustering outcome, looks very different from the traditional
clustering measure. So this is why early on I said it's another tool in your toolbox.
Different results, depends on your use case. Maybe this better aligns with what your needs are.
To me, when I looked at that black and white curve, the black and white lines originally,
this aligns more with what I thought, funny enough. But then I've asked others in preparation
for the presentation, and they said the traditional lined up more with what they thought.
That's kind of interesting.
That is it for that section. I don't, I haven't explored this too in depth. I do have another
project I'm working on with a colleague to build this out in more detail, comparing the different
approaches to see if this curve clustering idea is something that we want to adopt and replace,
or have in addition to our traditional clustering processes.
Awesome. I know on the topic of packages, because you just mentioned FDA, someone else had asked,
are there other packages that you could recommend to us for functional data analysis?
Yeah, absolutely. FDA is classic. Matthew mentions the refund package. That's really good.
There's a supplemental package to FDA called fda.usc, I think, and it gives you a little bit
more functionality. For example, in FDA, you can average the curves through the mean with this
supplemental package. You can do the median and a bunch of other stuff. There's a couple clustering.
Actually, if you wait a second, I have resources. I would recommend to visit the R-CRAN task view.
This is really neat. They have a running list of all available functional data analysis libraries
in R. That's how I discovered the clustering portion. There's a small snippet there that
describes the different techniques for curve clustering. Let's see.
I would say just visit that, explore. I got started on this journey in school. Actually,
we were learning about splines and GAMs, generalized additive models. I was really
interested with the idea. I asked my professor where I can get more information about functional
data analysis. My professor pointed me towards work by Professor Ramsey. I purchased these two
books here, functional data analysis. It's theoretical. It's the math behind things. It's
really good for understanding what the heck is going on in the background. For an applied
perspective, functional data analysis with R in MATLAB is a great resource. I actually have it
right here. I was doing something this morning with it. I reference that all the time.
There are also really great public posts. Joseph, I believe, is an RStudio employee. He has
three or four posts on Rviews that are really good. There's an online course that's in-depth
and quite lengthy. I'm sure it would cover your questions. If you're interested in GAMs
specifically, there's a great course by Noam Ross on that information.
There are other books too that are really good that I haven't purchased. I've only stuck with
these two. In summary, the R ecosystem for functional data analysis is really rich.
If you want to do something, it's there. Then I do know there are a few resources in Python as well.
That is it. That's all I had.
Thank you so much, Santiago. That was awesome. I see there's a lot of other great questions here
too. On that topic of all those great resources, I did just want to say to everyone as well,
if you have other things to share too, feel free to put them into the chat as well or
other things that have been helpful for you in learning FDA.
Yeah. One of Joseph's posts on Rview, the Rview's blog, shows a ... It looks like ... Shoot,
I'm drawing a blank on the name, but it's a map of how the different packages relate to each other.
At the center is the refund package that's getting a lot of love in the chat section,
but also FDA. The FDA package and the refund package are pretty much the source of all
newer works. That's really cool. I would say check that out. That's a really neat image.
Yeah. There's a lot out there. The ecosystem's so rich. Explore if you're interested.
Thank you. Let me go over to some of the Slido questions. As a reminder,
you can always raise your hand on Zoom too if you want to ask live. Let's see.
The question was, on the weather time series analysis ... Let's see. On the weather time
series analysis, based on what criteria will we give color? I'm not understanding the question
exactly. Feel free to weigh in if you want to add any other context to that question too,
or Santiago, if you understand what they might be asking there.
I think I get it. In the traditional clustering paradigm, you can ... Since our features are so
related, you're dealing with collinearity, dimension reduction is almost a necessity.
Using PCA on the features, treating them like independent features, and extracting some PCs
is the way to go. I would say that I think that answers that question from a traditional
perspective. From a curve clustering perspective, it's doing pretty much the same thing. It's doing
like you've seen in the chat, probably a functional PCA. It's doing that on the background,
in the back end too, and extracting some kind of variance and extracting the PCs based on some kind
of variance metric maybe. I honestly haven't explored the inner workings too much. I find it
useful to focus on applications first. If I can do it, first of all, and then
it meets my needs, then I go back and I start reading a little bit more about the information,
the details. For example, I've read the research paper a little bit to understand what's going on,
what's the background. It's pretty understandable if you have some understanding. It's not so
academic that it's beyond reach. For example, the F Fund HDDC has their papers. It's pretty
approachable, I would say, and check it out to have a good understanding of what it's doing.
But it's like the functional counterpart to traditional clustering. It's doing very similar
things. Thank you. I see someone else said, I know the GAMS course or G-A-M. What is the
difference between GAMS and FDA? Are they the same thing? Sort of. Yeah, I mean, yes, I guess
in short, yes. GAMS use cubic spline so that if you remember that early math formula, that linear
combination, if you think of like the regression component, you have your intercept and then you
have beta, give your coefficient times some data, coefficient times. That phi function builds out
the data component, the non-parametric data component, right? That non-parametric function.
There are different ways to fit that in GAMS. I don't know if you can switch that. I've only
ever seen it with cubic splines, in which case that is FDA, that is functional data analysis.
Let's see, you can generalize further and do maybe like
a functional regression on your own using the functional data analysis techniques
and then define the phi function as whatever you want it. Fourier, the Fourier series,
wavelets, monotone, polynomial, whatever. But I think GAMS specifically use cubic splines.
Thank you. Thomas, I saw you had your hand raised earlier if you want to jump in with your question.
Or maybe it was answered from Slido, but feel free to jump in again.
Kelly, I see you just asked a question in the chat too, if you want to ask live.
Oh, I can always ask the questions for people too. Feel free to put a little, like I should have
said that, sorry, a star next to your question if you ask in the Zoom chat too and want me to ask it.
The question was curious to know if anyone also tried using wavelet for curve modeling.
I haven't yet. In one of the textbooks by Professor Ramsey, he touts it as supposed to be
pretty good. I haven't really worked with it too much. I've mostly stuck with the Fourier series,
the Fourier basis expansion, and cubic splines.
For me to read, for me to read, I found the Fourier series, the Fourier basis functions
work really well, except in rare cases where, like I've seen this in business customers more,
where consumption can be, let me collect my thoughts, the Fourier series works really well
for periodic beta, right, because it's built by sines and cosines, but it doesn't do very well
when things are, like if something's jagged, it doesn't jump up very well, doesn't adjust
up to these, there's a term, but I'm looking at like, if your consumption was like this,
right, you go from nothing straight up, back down, these very jagged rises and peaks,
Fourier series won't approximate that very well. Cubic splines would fit that much better,
but there are downsides to that too, right, because you have to account for
differentiability if that's what you're interested in, or the endpoints with cubic splines can be
kind of wonky, so if you're trying, if you're doing something there, that might get weird.
Anyway.
Well, thank you so much. I think, oh, there was a question earlier from someone that
was more related to a coding question, the anonymous question was, they need to know how
to change the data class for all variables from double to original class without doing it manually
when they import a CSV file, and a few people were helping in the chat as well,
but their question, further question was, they want to change everything for like 50 variables
at once, and how to do that. I know it's hard to kind of ask coding questions here, it does,
does that make sense? Okay. Yeah, it's actually pretty easy, and all thanks to the tidyverse,
funny enough, so shout out RStudio. Using stuff like the across function, dplyr across,
you select your fields, for example, if you were interested in, if it was all fields,
it'd be super easy. If you need a certain number of fields, you can do something like dplyr across
columns, select where it contains, for example, if you have a set prefix or suffix or something,
and then function would be whatever you need to adjust it by.
I, so as part of this, since I'm using actual customer information,
I have to add noise to meet compliance standards and all that stuff, and I take, I do that very
thing. I take, I read in the data, the raw data, and then I do, by using the tidyverse,
I do an across function, apply noise, and then that just takes care of everything automatically.
There's probably other ways to do it, but the tidyverse would be probably my go-to. It's easy.
Thank you, and I just want to make sure that answered whoever's question that was. Feel free
to respond back anonymously in Slido too, and if not, you can always ask me one-on-one as well.
And then another question was, how often do you need to refit the curves or clustering?
It depends. It's almost, if I were to generalize that a little bit further, if you were,
depending on what you were doing, if you were doing a one-off analysis, then
only once, right? If you were putting this into production to do something like predicting
something, or clustering groups of customers, then you're entering a broader conversation about
when do you retune models in general, right? So, if you're doing something in production,
you should have some sort of like data drift type pipelines that assess as your data changed.
There was a previous comment about outliers. If your input data has tended to be one way,
and then all of a sudden just behavior changes, let's say, due to COVID or something else,
then it's probably time to retune, right? You should have a flag that says, hey,
just a heads up, or even break your procedure to say your input data is way different than what
it used to be. That's kind of a broader topic. There's no, I don't think there's a set defined
period, but there's a lot of research out there to help guide that conversation as to when,
how often, and it probably depends on the nature of your data, too. If you're doing something at
the daily level, it's probably more frequent. If you're working on aggregated yearly meter reads,
then once or twice a year would probably suffice. Awesome, thank you. Korin, Temma,
I see you have your hand raised, too, if you want to jump in. Hi, yes, I was still thinking about the
clustering, and I was thinking about what if there's a, there's sort of bias in the data in
terms of for my hundred customers, I do not have data, the same amount of data. For one customer,
I only have data for one month, and then maybe a couple of days in one month, and for some customers,
I have every day for six months, and like for that variation, would that affect in the clustering?
It shouldn't. The functional data analysis techniques are really robust. In my case,
since I'm, since I've typically worked with, like I'll prep the data, right, I will look at only
customers who have had at least six months of meter reads. I'll eliminate anywhere where
consumption is zero, because some people might just activate a meter, never use it, right,
get rid of those people. So, if you prep, I've used, what do you call it, equally spaced basis
functions, like the, the, they're called knots. The number of knots can be equally spaced. In my
case, for example, in this, in the presentation today, there are 24, right, because I'm working
24 hours in the day. I define a knot at each hour of the day, but let's say in your case, you had
month one, month two, month five, month seven, month 12, and you wouldn't use equally spaced
knots, because you don't have them. What you might do is fit curves individually to each customer
using whatever data you do have, whatever, like whatever periods you have, right, whatever knots
you have, define those for each, each customer, and then work with those, the respective curves.
For, for example, with my work, since I don't have that issue, I can work with all the customers at
once, and that, and that clustering, no, and actually, yeah, and that white paper I was
telling you about, I'm working with, it's about 60,000 customers, and so it's a, it's a matrix of
by 60, it's a 60,000, and by, not the other way, it's 24, and by 60,000 feet, right, so my customers
are, my features are really wide, I can just treat them all at once, because the data is the same,
it's 20, they have some data for all 24 hours, it makes it really easy. In your case, the only
thing that really switches is, you might have to fit the curves to each individual customer,
and then work with that, the, the output, like those, those, those curves, as opposed to working
with them all at once. Thank you. Let me just check to see if there were other questions. I
know a few people have to drop right at the top of the hour, so just, did just want to let you
know, I shared a few links in the chat, if you ever want to provide feedback for the meetups,
if you are interested in speaking at a future meetup, whether that's energy, or another industry
that you work in, and then also a calendar of, of upcoming events, too. One last question that was
on the slide of Santiago was, someone asked if you would be able to share this code for them to try it,
or if you have that shared on GitHub somewhere. I don't, only because it's, it's customer
information. I don't, I had, I had to meet compliance needs and standards, and go through a whole
process, so I don't know if I can share. I could certainly share the presentation,
but I don't know if I can share any code. I might be able to create a markdown type file,
and just hide that chunk, so you don't see anything there, but still show the steps after the fact.
I might be able to do that, but I don't know. Okay, thank you. I can follow up with you after,
and I'll share all the resources and slides with the recording as well, so that will go up to the
RStudio YouTube, and I'll put that playlist here for all the meetups in the chat, too,
so I'll work on hopefully sharing that by the end of the day tomorrow, too. I'll do one last
check for, for any questions. Feel free to unmute yourself and jump in.
Try to count at least seven seconds here. Thank you so much, Santiago, for an awesome presentation,
and, and sharing all those resources with us, too. Yeah, I appreciate it. Thank you, everybody.
Thank you.